Type of application based upon the business functionality usages (banking, gaming, social or business)
Target audience type (consumer, enterprise, education)
Distribution channel which is used to spread the application (e.g. Apple App Store, Google play, direct distribution)
The most fundamental test scenarios in the functional testing can be considered as :

To validate whether all the required mandatory fields are working as required.
To validate that the mandatory fields are displayed in the screen in a distinctive way than the non-mandatory fields.
To validate whether the application works as per as requirement whenever the application starts/stops.
To validate whether the application goes into minimized mode whenever there is an incoming phone call. In order to validate the same we need to use a second phone, to call the device.
To validate whether the phone is able to store, process and receive SMS whenever the app is running. In order to validate the same we need to use a second phone to send sms to the device which is being tested and where the application under test is currently running.
To validate that the device is able to perform required multitasking requirements whenever it is necessary to do so.
To validate that the application allows necessary social network options such as sharing, posting and navigation etc.
To validate that the application supports any payment gateway transaction such as Visa, Mastercard, Paypal etc as required by the application.
To validate that the page scrolling scenarios are being enabled in the application as necessary.
To validate that the navigation between relevant modules in the application are as per the requirement.
To validate that the truncation errors are absolutely to an affordable limit.
To validate that the user receives an appropriate error message like “Network error. Please try after some time” whenever there is any network error.
To validate that the installed application enables other applications to perform satisfactorily, and it does not eat into the memory of the other applications.
To validate that the application resumes at the last operation in case of a hard reboot or system crash.
To validate whether the installation of the application can be done smoothly provided the user has the necessary resources and it does not lead to any significant errors.
To validate that the application performs auto start facility according to the requirements.
To validate whether the application performs according to the requirement in all versions of Mobile that is 2g, 3g and 4g.
To perform Regression Testing to uncover new software bugs in existing areas of a system after changes have been made to them. Also rerun previously performed tests to determine that the program behavior has not changed due to the changes.
To validate whether the application provides an available user guide for those who are not familiar to the app